---
layout: post
title:  "I Was Born, But... (Why I Decided to Learn to Code)"
date:   2016-06-27 20:40:26 -0400
---


This is my first blog post ever.  I've never been one for sharing my thoughts on the Internet; my Facebook profile is essentially deserted and I primarily use Twitter as an RSS feed.  I did however join the #savetwinpeaks social media campaign.  Now, I don't know if hashtag campaigns **ever** really make any difference, but either way, we are getting new episodes of Twin Peaks next spring (!), and the correlation/causation mystery remains.  All that to say, I'm not used to doing this sort of writing, on the Internet, or anywhere!  Now, this first entry is about why I've decided to code for a living, and I'll get to that, but first, an important preamble to that story...

**I Was Born...**

I was born in New York City to my wonderful parents, Carmen and Efrain Senior.  I grew up in the Bronx during the early to mid 80's, just after the tenement fires of the 70's.  Our side of the street had just three houses.  Ours and the immediate neighbor's (a kindly old African American man we affectionately called "Papa") was smack in the middle of the block, and the last house was way up towards the northern corner.  I never knew who lived there.  Between us and the corner house was a vacant lot denizened by a revolving cadre of stray dogs, and there was another vacant lot from our house to the southern corner.  Dogs owned a lot of Bronx real estate in those days.

I don't describe the desolation of my neighborhood to set the scene of my brave assent from poverty.  Financially, my family didn't do too badly.  We owned the house, my father had a decent paying city job, and my mother worked as a school nurse.  And the neighborhood, while desolate, was actually pretty safe.  My childhood was miles away from *The Wire*, thank God.  Mostly, I describe were I was born to give you a sense of what there was for me to do outdoors...nothing.  Papa had a grandson who would visit him occasionally, and whenever he did my father turned on the street hydrant for us to play in, *just us*.  And sure there were probably other kids in the building across the street, but as a kid I honestly hated walking into buildings.  The smells were strange, the people looked threatening (to me), and there was never enough light in the hallways to feel inviting.  So, given my surroundings (and my introverted nature), what did I do to fill my time after school?  I did what every child of the 80's did, I played videogames.

Videogames were my childhood love.  I was a devout Nintendo kid (no Sega, thank you) who played my NES for hours each day after doing my homework.  During this period if asked what I wanted to be when I grew up, I would have probably answered, "Architect" (a parent induced answer if there was one), but I couldn't give a hoot about building design, I was playing Zelda!  When I got to high school and that question became more relevant, my response was clear and immediate, "Videogame Programmer".  This rang true, and I really couldn't imagine doing anything else.  My path stood before me: straight, smooth, no detours, no exit.  I applied to NYU, got in (entering class of 2000) and it was straight to the Computer Science Department.  My freshman advisor actually discouraged me from declaring my major immediately, and I acquiesced, but it didn't matter, I was going to program videogames, **the path was clear after all**, it was simply a matter of walking it.  I started to learn coding, first in procedural C, then Java and C++.  Honestly, coding felt just like playing puzzle videogames: here's the problem, now come up with a solution (algorithm) given certain practical/theoretical constraints.  It was fun to learn, and I was doing very well...until the ground shifted under me.

**But...**

Anxiety.  I had experienced it before, but never this severely.  It was the end of my junior year at NYU, and I, after five semesters of coding bliss, found myself unable to go to classes anymore.  I would stand in front of the Courant Institute building, sweating and negotiating with myself about whether I **really needed** to attend such and such class.  "Hell, I'm in the East Village, maybe I should go to IFC instead, or check out Tower Records, or Disco-O-Rama, or Other Music?" (R.I.P. to them all).  "Screw it, I'll go to the Virgin Megastore."  I mostly went to the Virgin Megastore.  I failed two of four classes that semester.

I utilized the school's mental health services for a time after that, and I thought I would be ok for the upcoming fall semester.  I failed three of four classes.  The university and I realized something deeper was happening, so they put me on a medical leave, referred me to an outside therapist and encouraged me to come back when I felt better.  **I came back and graduated nine years after my freshman year.**

Now I was married, on my own for the first time, with a wife who was also returning to school, a rent to pay, a new degree, and no job prospects.  I shuttered at the thought of having to explain to interviewers that I was a recent undergraduate who started his degree nearly a decade ago, and who had admittedly spent the intervening time not gaining industry experience, or honing my craft, but in therapy.  How do you spin that?  "Honing my emotions.", maybe?  Yeah, that's pretty good, "Hey you want emotionally in-touch people in your workplace, don't you?  Sure, I haven't programmed seriously in years, but please hire me!"  I had two recruiters let me down easy; they suggested I get my Masters.  It's summer 2009 now, and the rent is due. 

**The bills are waiting, ever waiting.**

About one week after graduation, I got a call from Kaplan Test Prep.  They needed customer service phone representatives and I needed a job, and luckily for me, they still hadn't outsourced that job to India yet.  So I went in for the interview, and my interviewer, who was himself looking for a career change, was getting his Masters in IT.  He was just starting his degree and had questions for me, like, "what is my favorite programming language?", things like that. We didn't talk much about the job.  He offered me the position, and I took it, because frankly, I felt I had to; programming just wasn't going to happen for me, at least not now, I thought.

**Customer service must be *somebody's* calling...**

I worked at Kaplan for about 3 years.  The first two weren't so bad, but the last was horrible.  When a group of us got laid off due to company downsizing, one would think that making that call to your wife would be difficult, but not for me. She could hear my smile over the phone.  Subsequently, I worked at conEdison (the electric company of New York City), doing the same job, where ennui set in even faster.  Customer service must be somebody's calling, but it wasn't mine.  That's when I called Rose.

**A path revisited.**

Rose is a former co-worker of my wife's who made a career change to web development through The Flatiron School.  Now a few years prior, my wife and I once had the pleasure of hanging out with Rose and her then boyfriend (now husband), Deniz.  Rose was teaching then and Deniz was finishing his PhD in Computer Science.  I can honestly say that there were moments that night where I felt really inadequate, but not because of anything Rose or Deniz said (they were very nice, actually), but because I felt behind everyone, including my wife.  In that first encounter, Deniz gave me some good advice about how I could pick up programming again, and he even mentioned The Flatiron School, which was the first time I'd even heard the name.  I really appreciated the support, but I still felt pretty dejected.  Fast forward two years later and my wife is telling me that Rose has left their organization to attend The Flatiron School.  I thought, "Wow, she's going to switch from education to coding?"  That's a big jump, I thought, even bigger then if I had done it, because at least I had prior programming experience.  If she could do it, maybe I could to.  When I called her, she was actually an instructor at Flatiron and told me all she could about the program.  I could feel passion stirring within me again.

**Conclusion**

So, why did I decide to (re)learn coding?  Because I feel called to it.  Simple as that.  Now, I have no illusions that coding for a living will be easy, or always fun, or will fill some "missing piece" of my soul.  That's asking too much of an occupation, and that's probably what the eighteen year old me expected when I naïvely started down this path.  No, what I desire now is meaningful work, that uses my God given talents, that I can say was helpful to someone, and that meant something to me.  This path is wider than the former, and the horizon isn't as clear.  Will I program videogames?  I don't know.  That's not the point.  As Ralph Waldo Emerson once said, "Life is a journey, not a destination."

